# Efficient Development & Debugging

- You sould work in productive environment (i.e. IDE, editor).
- Choose an editor or an IDE that have auto-format code feature and have smart auto-compeletion and hits (intellisense).
- Try to explore extensions and settings.
- Use shortcuts as much as you can.
- **MDN** (**M**ozilla **D**eveloper **N**etwork) is the best place for **JavaScript** documentation. It's like the official **JavaScript** documentation if there were one.
- You should learn go to **Google** (seriously!).
- Use **Stack Overflow** forum. It's the best place for asking proper questions and helping others.
- Always ask proper questions to get proper responses and also help other, don't just ask, be friendly. Dive into the community because that will allow you to grow as a developer.
- In programming, it's absolutely normal that you have more than one way of solving/achieving something. For exmaple, you can use `Number(..)` instead `parseInt(..)`.
- You will always encounter errors when writing code. If you're getting an error message, read and utilize it, seriously. You probably not the first person who got an error message, so put into google and you'll find many solutions there.
- Use `console.log(..)` to log whatever you want for debugging sake.
- Use the **Chrome** debugging tool (it's amazing). You can also use **FireFox** or **Edge** debugging tool. **VSCode** also have a debugging tool.
- You can use breakpoints for debugging your code in the browser by clicking on line numbers in source tab. You can also add a conditional breakpoints. For example: `enteredNumber > 10`.
- The **Call Stack** in browser is essentially a list of all the functions that have been called.
- You can watch your ideal variable value by setting them in **Watch** list in debugger tools. You can also use complex expression in Watch menu. For example: `value1 + value2`.
- You can set an **Event Listener Breakpoints** for debugging your code. It's on debugger panel.
- If you change **JavaScript** code in the browser developer tool, it won't replace your real code (filesystem) and it's just a temporary change. So you can test there without facing any danger of breaking things.
- In VSCode, you can install **Debugger for Chrome** extension to connect your editor dubugger to your Chrome dubugger. Now if you start debugging by pressing **F5** key on the keyboard (or go to **Run** menu and select **Start Debugging**), editor will ask for debugging environment (Chrome, NativeScript, Node.js, and etc). When you choose any of them, a `launch.json` file will be created in your project. You can customize this configuration.
