# Advanced Function Concepts

- In **JavaScript**, a **pure function** is a function which for some given input (arguments), always produces the same output, so the same arguments (values) always produce the same output. It also does not trigger any side effects, which means it does not change anything outside of the function. For example:

    ```js
    function add(num1, num2) {
        return num1 + num2;
    }

    console.log(add(1, 5)); // 6
    console.log(add(12, 15)); // 27
    ```

    An impure function is a function which is not pure. For example:

    ```js
    let previousResult = 0;

    function addMoreNumbers(num1, num2) {
        const sum = num1 + num2;
        previousResult = sum;
        return sum;
    }

    console.log(addMoreNumbers(4, 5)); // 9
    console.log(previousResult); // 9

    function addRandom(num) {
        return num + Math.random();
    }

    console.log(addRandom(5)); // a number between 5 and 6
    ```

- In **JavaScript**, a **factory function** is a function that produces another function. For example:

    ```js
    function createTaxCalculator(tax) {
        function calculateTax(amount) {
            return amount * tax;
        }

        return calculateTax;
    }

    const calculateVatAmount = createTaxCalculator(0.19);
    const incomeTaxAmount = createTaxCalculator(0.25);

    console.log(calculationVatAmount(100));
    console.log(calculationVatAmount(200));
    ```

- Every function in **JavaScript** is a closure. That simply means that inside of curly braces, if you create a variable in there or if you get a paramater, it's only usable inside of that function, but not outside of it. The more technical term for this would be that you have different lexical environments. Each function has its own lexical environment and variables and constants are registered in these different environments. Now why is it called a closure then? Because every function closes over the surrounding environment which means it registers the surrounding evnvironment and the variables resigtered there and it memorizes the values of these variables. If you then change a variable, that is reflected inside of the function, but if it does not change, the function still is able to use. For example the tax value (from previous the example) you passed in, when you created the outer function. For example:

    ```js
    let userName = "Hamed";

    function greetUser() {
        let name = userName;
        console.log("Hi " + name);
    }

    userName = "Hamid";

    greetUser(); // Hi Hamid
    ```

- If you have two or more variables or constants with the same name in some different places, **JavaScript** will use the inner environment over the outer environment when you want to use them and it's called **shadowing**. For example:

    ```js
    const name = "Hamed";

    function greetUser() {
        const name = "Hamid";
        console.log("Hi " + name);
    }

    greetUser(); // Hi Hamid
    ```

- ***If every function logs in all surrounding variables, doesn't that lead to a pretty bad effect in our memory (because in big applications where we have many variables, a function might log in a lot of variables which never uses)?*** Modern **JavaScript** engines optimize this. They basically track variable usage and if a variable obsiously isn't getting used by anything, then they will get rid of it and they will do so of course in a safe way, so they don't accidentally crash your program, because you need to use that function at some point of time, they're really smart about that and they optimize this whole behavior, so you don't manually have to reset all variables that you don't need.
- In **JavaScript**, the idea behind a recursion or a recursive function is that the function calls itself. For example:

    ```js
    function powerOf(x, n) {
        // if (n === 1) {
        //     return x;
        // }
        // return x * powerOf(x, n - 1);
        return n === 1 ? x : powerOf(x, n - 1);
    }

    console.log(powerOf(2, 3)); // 8
    /*
    To calculate `powerOf(2, 3)` the recursive variant does these steps:
    powerOf(2, 3) = 2 * powerOf(2, 2);
    powerOf(2, 2) = 2 * powerOf(2, 1);
    powerOf(2, 1) = 2;
    So 2 * 2 * 2 = 8
    To understand better, use the debugger tool
    */
    ```

- In **JavaScript** (especially in older scripts) you sometimes find a pattern described as **IIFE**. IIFE stands for **I**mmediately **I**nvoked **F**unction **E**xpression and the pattern you might find looks like this:

    ```js
    (function () {
        var age = 30;
        console.log(age); // 30
    })();

    console.log(age); // Error: "age is not defined"
    ```

    It's **not** a function declaration because it's wrapped in `()`. Please note that the snippet uses `var`, **not** `let` or `const`. Nowadays, this is not really required anymore.
