# More on Numbers & Strings

- In **JavaScript**, every number is a float (with decimal places). Unlike other programming languages, **JavaScript** does not know special integer types. That means numbers like `5`, `-3` or `12` would actually be stored like `5.0`, `-3.0` or `12.0`. Numbers are stored as 64-bit floating points, so there are 64-bits available to internally represent a number (bits are these things which can be either 0 or 1). One bit is reserved for the sign (positive or negative number) and other bits are basically there to represent the digits of the number and where the dot is (where the decimal places sits).
- The biggest possible number you can represent with normal number type (the biggest integer) in **JavaScript** is `9007199254740991` (9 quadrillion). You can get it with `Number.MAX_SAFE_INTEGER` property. For example:

    ```js
    console.log(Number.MAX_SAFE_INTEGER); // 9007199254740991
    ```

    You also have a `MIN_SAFE_INTEGER` which is essentially the same number with a negative sign in front of it (`-9007199254740991`). You also have a `MAX_VALUE` here and difference is that is actually a decimal number and that's `1.7976931348623157e+308`, so that's the biggest value you can work with in **JavaScript**. As you guessed, you also have a `MIN_VALUE` which is `5e-324`.
- The `toFixed(..)` method returns a string representing a number in fixed-point notation. For example:

    ```js
    const number = 3.1415;

    console.log(number.toFixed(2));
    ```

    It takes a number between 0 and 100 as an argument.
- In **JavaScript**, the **Bigint** can be useful if you're working with very large numbers, of course not just positive ones, but also negative ones. You create a Bigint by simply adding a `n` after your number. It's called Bigint because it's only about integers and it's the perfect type if you're working with very large integers. You **can't** mix Bigint and other numbers. For example:

    ```js
    const bigint = 6000n;
    const int = 1000;

    console.log(parseInt(bigint) + int); // 7000
    console.log(bigint + int); // TypeError: Cannot mix BigInt and other types, use explicit conversions
    ```

    The Bigint cuts off the decimal places if you have a calculation with result of a decimal number. For example:

    ```js
    console.log(5n / 2n); // 2n
    ```

- In **JavaScript**, `Infinity` is displayed when a number exceeds the upper limit of the floating point numbers, which is `1.797693134862315E+308` and `-Infinity` is displayed when a number exceeds the lower limit of the floating point numbers, which is `-1.797693134862316E+308`. You can check a value if it's a finite number or not with `Number.isFinite(..)` method. For example:

    ```js
    const infinite = Infinity;
    const number = 560;

    console.log(Number.isFinite(infinite));
    console.log(Number.isFinite(number));
    ```

- In **JavaScript**, with `Math.random(..)` you can get a random number between `0` and `1` (actually `0` and `0.9999999...`). There are some trick to generate some random numbers between two numbers. For example:

    ```js
    function randomIntBetween(min, max) {
        return Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min + 1) + min);
    }

    // generates numbers between 3 and 8 each time:
    console.log(randomIntBetween(3, 8)); // 5
    console.log(randomIntBetween(3, 8)); // 3
    console.log(randomIntBetween(3, 8)); // 8
    ```

- In **JavaScript**, a tagged template is a function that works together with template literals. For example:

    ```js
    function productDescription(strings, productName, productPrice) {
        console.log(strings);
        console.log(productName);
        console.log(productPrice);
        return "This is a product!";
    }

    const prodName = "JavaScript Course";
    const prodPrice = 29.99;

    const productOutput = productDescription`This product (${prodName}) is ${prodPrice}.`);

    console.log(productOutput); // This is a product!
    /*
    [ 'This product (', ') is ', '.' ]
    JavaScript Course
    29.99
    This is a product
    */
    ```

    In Here, **JavaScript** simply goes through your template literal, takes all non-dynamic parts and puts them into the first argument which is an array and then takes the dynamic parts and adds them in the right order as argument values to the function.
- Regular expressions (regex) helps you to search for patterns in strings. For example:

    ```js
    const email = "testgmail.com"; // invalid email
    const regex = /^\S+@\S+\.\S+$/;

    console.log(regex.test(email)); // false
    console.log(regex.test("test@gmail.com")); // true
    ```

    As you can see, you can define a regular expression pattern in between two forward slashes (`/`). You can also define a regular expression with `RegExp(..)` constructor. For example:

    ```js
    const email = "test@gmail.com";
    const regex = new RegExp(/^\S+@\S+\.\S+$/);

    console.log(regex.test(email)); // true
    ```
